W-16439901 asm eol gr (#644)
mulesoft/docs-gateway: gateway/1.8/modules/ROOT/pages/flex-gateway-istio.adoc

= Integrating Flex Gateway with Istio Service Mesh
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:imagesdir: ../assets/images

> Integrate Flex Gateway into your Istio Service Mesh to leverage Flex Gateway policies, logging, and metrics from the Anypoint Platform control plane. Deploy Flex Gateway as an ingress gateway to manage incoming north-south cluster traffic and internal east-west traffic inside the cluster.

Reviewer: Consider putting the user value first. "To leverage...., integrate".

> To deploy this Flex Gateway use case, use the following architecture diagram and tutorial. The use case is a modified version of the https://istio.io/latest/docs/examples/bookinfo/[Istio Bookinfo Application] with Flex Gateway integrated. In the use case:

Reviewer: Instead of calling this the "use case", can you just say something like "integrate Flex Gateway with ...."?

> * An Istio virtual service forwards all ingress north-south traffic to Flex Gateway.

Reviewer: Previously (and subsequently), you use incoming rather than ingress. Suggest making consistent.

* Direct access to the `bookinfo` name space is restricted. All external traffic into the `bookinfo` namespace must come from the `flex` namespace. Istio automatically configures mTLS configuration between the `bookinfo` and `flex`.
* Flex Gateway protects and monitors the exposed product page service from incoming traffic with an API instance.

> * The Istio sidecar intercepts east-west traffic between the product page service and the reviews service. Flex Gateway acts as an ingress gateway managing incoming traffic to the reviews service.

Reviewer: "reviews service" is correct?

> image:flex-istio-deployment.png["A detailed image of the previously described use case."]

Reviewer: The alt text should be a sentence fragment that describes the image, but not be self-referential. (Don't say "A detailed image")

Can you try writer.ai to generate alt text?

> NOTE: In the diagram, Flex Gateway is running in Connected Mode. If Flex gateway was running is local mode, the Anypoint Platform control plane is not present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: In the diagram, Flex Gateway is running in Connected Mode. If Flex Gateway runs in local mode, the Anypoint Platform control plane is absent.
```

Reviewer: Connected Mode is init cap, but local mode is not. Correct?

To configure the architecture:

. Review <<before-you-begin>>.

> . <<setup-environment>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<setup-environment, Set up your environment>>.
```

> . <<forward-ingress-traffic>>.

Reviewer: Can you make the link text sentence case?

. <<create-a-service>>.

[[before-you-begin]]
== Before You Begin

Before you begin, install the following prerequisites:

> * https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/[Docker^]

Reviewer: (no need to add the ^ - added automatically now)

* xref:flex-install.adoc#kubernetes[Download Flex Gateway for Use in a Kubernetes Cluster]

> * https://k3d.io/v5.0.0/#installation[K3d] to create a kubernetes cluster inside of docker

Reviewer: Should kubernetes be init cap?

> * https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[kubectl] to control the Kubernetes cluster

Reviewer: or lowercase?

* https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/[Helm] to install Flex Gateway and Istio

[[setup-environment]]

> == Setup Environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Set up Environment
```

Reviewer: set up = verb
setup = noun/adj

. Create a Kubernetes cluster for this demo or skip this step if you already have a cluster you want to use:
+
[source,ssh]
----
k3d cluster create demo-istio --k3s-arg "--disable=traefik@server:0" --port '80:80@server:0' --port '443:443@server:0'
----

. Add the Flex Gateway and Istio Helm repositories:
+
[source,ssh]
----
helm repo add istio https://istio-release.storage.googleapis.com/charts \
&& helm repo add flex-gateway https://flex-packages.anypoint.mulesoft.com/helm \
&& helm repo up
----

. Install Istio:
+

> .. Install the Istio base chart that contains the cluster-wide Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) that must be installed prior to the deployment of the Istio control plane:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Install the Istio base chart that contains the cluster-wide Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) that must be installed before deploying the Istio control plane:
```

+
[source,ssh]
----
helm upgrade -i --wait --create-namespace -n istio-system istio-base istio/base --version 1.21.2 --set defaultRevision=default
----
+
.. Install the Istio discovery chart that deploys the `istiod` service:
+
[source,ssh]
----
helm upgrade -i --wait --create-namespace -n istio-system istiod istio/istiod --version 1.21.2
----
+
.. Install an Istio ingress gateway:
+
[source,ssh]
----
helm upgrade -i --wait --create-namespace -n istio-system istio-ingress istio/gateway --version 1.21.2
----

. Install Flex Gateway:

> .. Create the namespace and setup the label to enable the sidecar injection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Create the namespace and set up the label to enable the sidecar injection:
```

--set service.https.enabled=false \
--set-file registration.content=registration.yaml
----
+
.. List all services and API instances previously created:
+
[source,ssh]
----
kubectl -n flex get svc
----

. Install the `bookinfo` application:
+
.. Enable Istio label injection in the default namespace and install the `bookinfo` application:
+
[source,ssh]
----
kubectl create ns bookinfo \
&& kubectl label ns bookinfo istio-injection=enabled --overwrite \
&& kubectl -n bookinfo apply -l version!=v2,version!=v3 -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.20/samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml
----
+
.. Check the pod status:
+
[source,ssh]
----
kubectl -n bookinfo get pods 
----

. Install the `sleep` application to test traffic:
+
.. Create the `test` namespace and install the `sleep` application:
+
[source,ssh]
----
kubectl create ns test \
&& kubectl label ns test istio-injection=enabled --overwrite \
&& kubectl -n test apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.20/samples/sleep/sleep.yaml
----
+
.. Check the status of the pods:
+
[source,ssh]
----
kubectl -n test get pods
----

[[forward-ingress-traffic]]
== Forward Ingress Traffic

> .  Create the Flex Gateway ingress API instance to forward all north-south incoming traffic in the `bookinfo` namespace to the `productpage` service:

Reviewer: Does this work with the extra space?

Reviewer: I think incoming should come before north-south.

+

> ** Local Mode:

Reviewer: init cap here... should it always be init cap?

+
[source,ssh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
---
apiVersion: gateway.mulesoft.com/v1alpha1
kind: ApiInstance
metadata:
  name: ingress
  namespace: flex
spec:
  address: http://0.0.0.0:8081/ingress/
  services:
    productpage:
      address: http://productpage.bookinfo.svc:9080
EOF
----
+
** Connected Mode:
+
To add an API instance in Connected Mode, see xref:api-manager::create-instance-task-flex.adoc[].
+
Configure the API instance with the following downstream parameters:
+
*** *Protocol*: *HTTP*
*** *Port*: `8081`
*** *Base Path*: `/ingress/`
+
Configure the API instance with the following upstream parameters:
+
*** *Route label*: `productpage`
*** *Upstream URL*: `http://productpage.bookinfo.svc:9080`

> . Create the `flex` Istio ingress gateway to forward the ingress traffic to Flex Gateway using a istio virtual service:

Reviewer: Should istio be init cap here?

+
.. Create the Flex Gateway:
+
[source,ssh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
---
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: flex
  namespace: flex
spec:
  selector:
    app: istio-ingress
  servers:
  - port:
      number: 80
      name: http
      protocol: HTTP
    hosts:
    - "*"
---
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: flex
  namespace: flex
spec:
  hosts:
  - "*"
  gateways:
  - flex
  http:
  - route:
    - destination:
        host: flex
        port:
          number: 8081
    rewrite:
      uri: /ingress/
EOF
----
+

> .. Wait a few seconds (approximately 10) and send a test request the `/api/v1/products/1` page:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Wait a few seconds (approximately 10) and send a test request to the `/api/v1/products/1` page:
```

+
[source,ssh]
----
curl -v http://localhost/api/v1/products/1
----
+

> .. Ensure you receive the following output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Ensure you receive this output:
```

+
[source,ssh]
----
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< server: istio-envoy
< date: Tue, 27 Feb 2024 22:06:33 GMT
< content-type: application/json
< content-length: 195
< x-envoy-upstream-service-time: 8
<
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
{"id": 2, "author": "William Shakespeare", "year": 1595, "type": "paperback", "pages": 200, "publisher": "PublisherA", "language": "English", "ISBN-10": "1234567890", "ISBN-13": "123-1234567890"}
----

> . Protect the Flex Gateway API instance with the Basic Authentication policy applied:

Reviewer: "with the" -> "by applying the"?

+
.. Add the policy:
+
[source,ssh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
---
apiVersion: gateway.mulesoft.com/v1alpha1
kind: ApiInstance
metadata:
  name: ingress
  namespace: flex
spec:
  address: http://0.0.0.0:8081/ingress/
  services:
    productpage:
      address: http://productpage.bookinfo.svc:9080
  policies:
  - policyRef:
      name: http-basic-authentication-flex
    config:
      username: foo
      password: bar
EOF
----
+
.. Wait a few seconds (approximately 10) and send a test request:
+
[source,ssh]
----
curl -v http://localhost/
----
+

> .. Ensure you receive a `401` response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Make sure you receive a `401` response.
```

. Add the Message Logging policy to log traffic:
+
[source,ssh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
---
apiVersion: gateway.mulesoft.com/v1alpha1
kind: ApiInstance
metadata:
  name: ingress
  namespace: flex
spec:
  address: http://0.0.0.0:8081/ingress/
  services:
    productpage:
      address: http://productpage.bookinfo.svc:9080
  policies:
  - policyRef:
      name: http-basic-authentication-flex
    config:
      username: foo
      password: bar
  - policyRef:
      name: message-logging-flex
    config:
      loggingConfiguration:
      - itemName: "Request"
        itemData:
          message: "#['> ' ++ attributes.version ++ ' ' ++  attributes.method ++ ' ' ++ attributes.headers.host ++ attributes.requestUri]"
          level: "INFO"
          firstSection: true
      - itemName: "Response"
        itemData:
          message: "#['< Status=' ++ attributes.statusCode ++ ' Length=' ++ (attributes.headers['content-length'] default 'none') ++ ' Time=' ++ (attributes.headers['x-envoy-upstream-service-time'] default 'none')]"
          level: "INFO"
          secondSection: true
    order: 0 
EOF
----

[[create-a-service]]

> == Create a Service to Service Traffic

Reviewer: Should this be "Service-to-Service"?

> == Create a Service to Service Traffic

Reviewer: Is it "Service-to-Service" or is it a service that services traffic? This is hard to parse.

Reviewer: Should it be "to Forward Traffic"?

Author: I agree, it was an engineering suggestion, let me see if we can change it.

** Local Mode:
+
[source,ssh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
---
apiVersion: gateway.mulesoft.com/v1alpha1
kind: ApiInstance
metadata:
  name: bookinfo-reviews
  namespace: flex
spec:
  address: http://0.0.0.0:8081/bookinfo/reviews/
  services:
    upstream:
      address: http://reviews.bookinfo.svc:9080
  policies:
  - policyRef:
      name: message-logging-flex
    config:
      loggingConfiguration:
      - itemName: "Request"
        itemData:
          message: "#['> ' ++ attributes.version ++ ' ' ++  attributes.method ++ ' ' ++ attributes.headers.host ++ attributes.requestUri]"
          level: "INFO"
          firstSection: true
      - itemName: "Response"
        itemData:
          message: "#['< Status=' ++ attributes.statusCode ++ ' Length=' ++ (attributes.headers['content-length'] default 'none') ++ ' Time=' ++ (attributes.headers['x-envoy-upstream-service-time'] default 'none')]"
          level: "INFO"
          secondSection: true
EOF
----

** Connected Mode:
+
To add an API instance in Connected Mode, see xref:api-manager::create-instance-task-flex.adoc[].
+

> Configure the API instance with the following downstream parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the API instance with these downstream parameters:
```

+
*** *Protocol*: *HTTP*
*** *Port*: `8081`
*** *Base Path*: `/bookinfo/reviews/`
+

> Configure the API instance with the following upstream parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the API instance with these upstream parameters:
```

+
*** *Route label*: `reviews`
*** *Upstream URL*: `http://reviews.bookinfo.svc:9080`

> . Intercept the traffic between the `productpage` service to the `reviews` service and forward it to `flex` service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Intercept the traffic between the `productpage` service and the `reviews` service and forward it to the `flex` service:
```

+
.. Create the Istio API instance:
+
[source,ssh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
---
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: bookinfo-reviews
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  hosts:
  - reviews.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local
  http:
  - match:
    - sourceLabels:
        app: flex
    route:
    - destination:
        host: reviews.bookinfo.svc.cluster.local
        port:
          number: 9080
  - route:
    - destination:
        host: flex.flex.svc.cluster.local
        port:
          number: 8081
    rewrite:
      uri: /bookinfo/reviews/
EOF
----
+

> .. Send a test request with the `foo` user and `bar` password to the `/productpage`:

Reviewer: Avoid [foobar](https://confluence.internal.salesforce.com/display/MTDT/MuleSoft+CX+Writing+Style+Reference#MuleSoftCXWritingStyleReference-%22foo,foobar,fubar,FUBAR%22...):

+
[source,ssh]
----
curl -v -u foo:bar http://localhost/productpage
----
+

> .. Check the Flex Gateway logs to ensure the request sent from the `productpage` service to the `reviews` service passed through the Flex Gateway. The logs appear similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Check the Flex Gateway logs to ensure the request sent from the `productpage` service to the `reviews` service passed through Flex Gateway. The logs appear similar to:
```

          level: "INFO"
          firstSection: true
      - itemName: "Response"
        itemData:
          message: "#['< Status=' ++ attributes.statusCode ++ ' Length=' ++ (attributes.headers['content-length'] default 'none') ++ ' Time=' ++ (attributes.headers['x-envoy-upstream-service-time'] default 'none')]"
          level: "INFO"
          secondSection: true
    order: 0
  - policyRef:
      name: rate-limiting-flex
    config:
      rateLimits:
      - timePeriodInMilliseconds: 60000
        maximumRequests: 2
      exposeHeaders: true
EOF
----

. Restrict direct access to the `bookinfo` service:
+
.. Restrict access:
+
[source,ssh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
---
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1
kind: AuthorizationPolicy
metadata:
  name: flex-allow
  namespace: bookinfo
spec:
  action: ALLOW
  rules:
  - from:
    - source:
        namespaces:
        - flex
        - bookinfo
EOF
----
+
.. Send a test request from the test namespace to the `details` service:
+
[source,ssh]
----
kubectl -n test exec -ti -c sleep $(kubectl -n test get pod --no-headers -o=name) -- curl -v details.bookinfo:9080/details/0
----
+

> .. Ensure you receive the following `403 forbidden` response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Make sure you receive this `403 forbidden` response:
```

+
[source,ssh]
----
< HTTP/1.1 403 Forbidden
< content-length: 19
< content-type: text/plain
< date: Thu, 09 May 2024 15:51:11 GMT
< server: envoy
< x-envoy-upstream-service-time: 0
<
* Connection #0 to host details.bookinfo left intact
RBAC: access denied
----
+

> .. Send the following request to the `details` service to find how to access the `bookinfo` service from the `flex` namespace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Send this request to the `details` service to find out how to access the `bookinfo` service from the `flex` namespace:
```

+
[source,ssh]
----
kubectl -n flex exec -ti -c app  $(kubectl -n flex get pod --no-headers -o=name) -- flexctl check http http://details.bookinfo:9080/details/0
----
+

> .. Ensure the following response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Make sure you receive this response:
```

----
+
.. Ensure you receive a `401` response.

. Add the Message Logging policy to log traffic:
+
[source,ssh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
---
apiVersion: gateway.mulesoft.com/v1alpha1
kind: ApiInstance
metadata:
  name: ingress
  namespace: flex
spec:
  address: http://0.0.0.0:8081/ingress/
  services:
    productpage:
      address: http://productpage.bookinfo.svc:9080
  policies:
  - policyRef:
      name: http-basic-authentication-flex
    config:
      username: foo
      password: bar
  - policyRef:
      name: message-logging-flex
    config:
      loggingConfiguration:
      - itemName: "Request"
        itemData:
          message: "#['> ' ++ attributes.version ++ ' ' ++  attributes.method ++ ' ' ++ attributes.headers.host ++ attributes.requestUri]"
          level: "INFO"
          firstSection: true
      - itemName: "Response"
        itemData:
          message: "#['< Status=' ++ attributes.statusCode ++ ' Length=' ++ (attributes.headers['content-length'] default 'none') ++ ' Time=' ++ (attributes.headers['x-envoy-upstream-service-time'] default 'none')]"
          level: "INFO"
          secondSection: true
    order: 0 
EOF
----

[[create-a-service]]

> == Create a Service to Serve Traffic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Create a Service to Service Traffic
```
